[MUSIC]
Let's take a look at the central
physics case measurement of specific
characteristics of our role
on the subatomic level.
If you remember, we spoke previously about
the very big difference between
the magnitude of gravity and other forces.
So there are different hypotheses that
tried to explain this phenomenon.
For example, large extra dimension models,
graviton, and micro black-holes.
And one of the hypothesis says
that there are extra dimensions
that exist in our world that we don't
notice because they are very tiny.
Look at the illustration on the left.
So there is a lady walking on the wire,
and for her,
since she is a large entity
compared to the wire diameter,
it's essentially a one dimensional object.
But for a flea that sits on this wire,
there is actually additional dimension,
and she can consider the wire
as a two-dimensional object.
You can follow the link and
see a nice cartoon by
Daniel Whiteson about explanation,
what are those extra dimensions?
And the way how you can prove the theory
works or not is to make an experiment.
In the case of the Large Hadron Collider,
you design an experiment or
look for a specific decay or
a specific kind of event
that you can measure.
And in some cases,
events might happen with higher
probability than in other cases.
And some theories might explain
those differences in probabilities.
We will talk about this in more
details at the third lecture but,
for the moment,
let's consider we need to measure
a specific quantity related to events
happening at the Large Hadron Collider.
And the measuring is a key for
theory discrimination.
Actually, there are plenty of
theories has been studied already,
has been tested already at Collider.
And on this slide, you see examples of
various models that people have probed on
ATLAS experiment, or
those are called ATLAS Exotics Searches.
And it shows how well or how bad
the limit or estimation of the model
compares to the standard model.
And you see that all the measurements
are pretty much aligned with
standard model predictions.
So let's look at the example
of Higgs boson discovery.
And in this case,
it is a decay of Higgs boson into two photons.
So you see how the theoretical
picture of those event looks like,
so it is displayed on the top
right part of the slide.
It is so-called Feynman diagram
that shows the process in theory.
At the same time, there is a diagram or
a histogram that shows the dependency
of the number of events with
respect to the mass of the event.
And you see that there was
a special bump that is
highlighted in the middle of
the histogram that shows the excess of
the experimental data that has been
measured at the experiment Atlas.
With respect to the data that we
expected to see on the assumption
that there is no such thing as decay
of Higgs boson into gamma quants.
Let's make a short detour
into the Feynman diagram,
because it is a really
powerful instrument for
displaying the processes that
happen on subatomic level.
So at this particular diagram,
you see a muon that transforms
into something else.
So at the same time,
at this diagram you see a time scale and
a coordinate depicted by letter S.
We start with a muon and
the time goes on the horizontal axis.
And then it turns into something else,
like a muon neutrino and W boson.
And then in turn, this W boson turns into
an electron and anti-electron neutrino.
Let's look at the steps.
So those Feynman diagrams
consist of lines that
represent particles and
by dots that represent interaction points.
Those are points in the diagram
that reach momentum charge and
energy conservation must be valid.
At the second vertex, we see creation
of particles out of W boson.
And this creation of particle
also conserves mass and
charge and energy of particles.
So in short,
Feynman diagram represent a quantum
process that unfolds in space and time.
And consists two basic elements,
which are straight lines of particles and
forces that are represented by wavy lines.
Vertices represent interaction point
which conserve energy and momentum.
And those diagrams allow for
calculation of the probability of the
processes that happens according to those.
And in the following slides,
we'll try to examine
their appearance of so-called Z boson.
It mediates weak interaction,
along with W boson.
And these kind of boson,
the boson can decay into various nodes,
or channels, as they're called
by physicists, which are lepton,
anti-lepton pair, neutrino, anti-neutrino
pair, or quark or anti-quark pair.
Roughly, the ratio of those molds
are presented in the slide.
But more exact values of
those ratios is specified at
so-called particle data
group database that contains
information about all possible
decays that has been recorded so
far by all particle experiments.
So discovery of that boson
has happened in 1983 at CERN,
and it is very important part
of standard model jigsaw puzzle.
So let's take a look at the process
that creates this kind of boson.
So here is a more complicated Feynman
diagram on the top left of the slide.
So we start from the protons
that collide with each other,
and you see that every proton,
it consists of three quarks.
So it is up, up and down quarks.
And out of those three quarks,
one becomes engaged with the other
quark coming from other proton.
So it is schematically represented
at the center of the slide.
So those two down quarks
interact with each other and
turn either into a gamma quark or
a Z boson,
which eventually decays into a muon,
an anti-muon pair.
So another representation
of the process is a more
simplistic one you can see on
the top right of the screen,
so just basically a Z boson
decaying into muon, anti-muon pair.
And since we have a particle that
decays into a muon, anti-muon pair,
such processes is called resonance.
And its probability can be
estimated from the diagram
according to the formula
that is depicted here.
You can find more details via the link.
But the most important
part is the probability of
decay of this kind, Z boson decaying
into a neuron, anti-neuron pair,
is the highest at the so-called
invariant mass of two mu's
equal to mass of the Z boson that
has been used to create those.
So displaying this
probability distribution
according to mass access,
we see something like the Gaussian,
as it's displayed on the right
part of this picture.
And the alternative mode of
those two muons appearing
out of the two down quarks
direction is through gamma quant.
And since gamma quant doesn't
have any specific mass,
there is no specific peak at any
specific region of the mass scale.
So the probability distribution of finding
two muons coming from a gamma quant is
depicted on the histogram on the slide.
And you see the shape of this histogram
is quite different from
the one we saw before.
So in reality, we see a mixture
of two processes together.
So we see something that
is a combination of
a Gaussian-like shape and
exponential-like shape.
And somehow we can extract
information about the Gaussian
from the mixture of the model.
And the most interesting part,
the most interesting parameter
that we can extract is actually
mass of the set that boson.
And we can do so, for example,
by feeding a Gaussian and
some exponential shape into the histogram
that we got from the experiment.
So here you see the dimuon mass spectrum.
It is a histogram that shows number
of events that have specific mass.
And the range of the mass
scales from very small
value to very high, thousand of GeV.
And you see there are several peaks that
sits on the shape of the background.
Every peak correspond to a specific
particle that has been discovered
at certain point of time.
And we will focus in the home
task at the finding parameters,
or finding mass of Z boson.
[MUSIC]